hi this is pressure Locker in this video
I'm going to teach you a really cool
mental math trick of how you can
multiply any two numbers that end in the
digit 5 I'll explain this process with
several examples and then I'll show you
how you can use it to solve many related
mathematical problems at the end of the
video I'll give you a proof of why this
method works let's say you want to
multiply 15 by 35 both the numbers 15
and 35 have the last digit of 5 so
there's a quick way we can solve this
the steps are to add the product and
average of the leading digits of the
number we multiply that result by a
hundred and then we add 25 so let me go
over these steps in detail the numbers
15 and 35 both end in the digit 5 for
the rest of the calculation we can
ignore these digits of 5 and focus on
just the leading digits of the number
the first step is to add the product and
the average of these digits we find the
product by multiplying 1 by 3 to get 3
and we find the average by taking the
average of 1 and 3 which is 2 so we add
the product of 3 to the average of 2 to
get 5 and that's the hard part of the
computation the rest of it will be easy
we multiply this by a hundred to get 500
and finally we add 25 we get the result
of 525 and that's our answer
15 times 35 is 525 let's do another
example of this technique let's say you
want to multiply 65 by 75 both of these
numbers end in the digit 5 so we can
cover up the digit 5 we now want to
multiply these digits to get 42 and we
take the average which is 6.5
adding this together we get 48.5 now we
multiply by a hundred to get forty eight
fifty and then we add 25 so we have
forty eight seventy five and that's our
answer
65 by seventy five is forty eight
seventy five you can also do this for
it's four numbers which have more than
two digits let's say you want to do 35
by a hundred and fifteen both of these
numbers end in the digit five so we
cover up the five and we only need to do
calculation for the leading digits the
product of 3 and 11 is 33 the average of
3 and 11 is 7 adding these together we
get 40 we then multiply by a hundred and
finally we add 25 this gets a result of
four thousand twenty-five and that's the
answer of 35 times 115 so you can
actually use this technique to solve
other problems let's say you wanted to
fill 14 gallons of gas at 3 dollars and
18 cents that would be the problem 14
times 3 point 1 8 now you can't use the
technique because neither of these
numbers end in 5 but you can estimate by
considering a related problem what if
you wanted to fill 15 gallons at 315
cents per gallon that would be the
problem of 15 times 315 so now both of
these numbers end in the digit 5 so we
can use the technique that we just
learned in this video we cover up the 5
then we take the product of 1 and 31
which is 31 we take the average which is
16 we add these together and then we
multiply by 100 and add 25 so we get
that 15 times 315 is 47 25 if we convert
this back into dollars we get 15 times 3
point 1 5
is 4725 now we only wanted to fit this
is to estimate filling 15 gallons but of
course we only need to fill 14 gallons
so we wanted to fill one fewer gallon we
would be multiplying 14 by 315 so we
subtract 315 from 47 25 so we subtract
$3 we get to 44 then we subtract 15
cents and then we get 10 cents so we
figured out that 14 times 315 is 44 10
and this is extraordinarily close we
wanted to sell 14 by 3 18 and that's 44
52 so using this process of multiplying
two numbers ending in five and doing a
slight modification we actually were
able to get within 42 cents of the exact
answer and we could do this all in our
head so why does this technique work if
you're multiplying two numbers that end
in five that's multiplying the binomials
10 X plus 5 times 10 y plus 5 the x and
y are the leading digits of the number
if we expand this out we get 100 X Y
plus 50 times X plus y plus 25 now 50 is
one half of a hundred so we can factor
out a hundred and then we get a hundred
XY plus the average of X plus y and
finally we add on 25 at the end and this
is the formula we've been using in this
video
X Y is the product x + y over 2 is the
average so this is adding the product in
average of the leading digits we're then
multiplying by a hundred that's the
hundred part and then finally we're
adding 25 if you like this video please
check out my book the best mental metric
it includes techniques like this
complete with applications and examples
and mathematical proofs why they work
there's a link in the video description
thanks for watching please subscribe to
my channel you can catch me on my blog
mind your decisions which you can follow
on Facebook Google+ and patreon you can
also catch me on social media at
pressure Walker and you can check out
all my books there are descriptions in
the video description